Luis showed us a hierarchical clustering example in
which a pizza parlor wanted to cluster the locations of its customers,
so that it can determine where it should open up its branches.
This was an example of a method called single link clustering.
Let's look at it more closely.
So say, we have this dataset that has two features that we've plotted here.
We want to cluster it using single link clustering.
The first step is to assume that each point is already a cluster,
and we'll give each point a label,
so we can talk about them.
Then, the next step would be to calculate the distances
between each point and each other points,
and then we choose the smallest distance between two clusters,
and we group those two points into a cluster like this.
On the side here,
we will add up that cluster in this shape
with this sort of bracket connecting the two points.
And then, we can go on and find the nearest two clusters to each other,
and that would turn out to be these two,
and we put them on the side there,
and then this would be our third cluster,
and we have that in the shape on the side there.
The problem is a little bit different now.
Look at this example here.
So, what is the distance between the orange cluster and point number 7.
Is it the distance between seven and six?
Is it the distance between seven and eight?
Or is it, for example,
the average of them, or is it something else?
And it turns out that this is one of the things that separates
the various types of hierarchical clustering methods,
and we'll look at a few of those.
Single link looks at the closest point in the cluster, and so,
the distance between these two clusters is the distance
between seven and six which is the closest point to it here.
And so, this distance turns out to be the closest
between all the other distances between clusters here,
and so, we group seven with this cluster here.
Notice that this new cluster has another cluster as a child of it,
and so, that's reflected here when we wrap it like this.
And here, you can start to understand how our tree will start to grow.
If we continue to add the clusters together,
we can have this tree that encompasses the entire data points.
This is also called a dendrogram.
So, where are the clusters?
An input that we have to give to single link is to say,
how many clusters we are looking for.
So, if we want two clusters,
we can say, okay after building this tree,
we can say, alright, this is a height of the tree where there are only two links,
so we can cut the tree at this height,
and that would result in us having this tree as one cluster,
and then these as another cluster.
If we want three clusters,
we can cut the tree at this height,
and then that would give us this point in one cluster,
this in a second cluster, and this in three.
And you can see, you can go to each height would give you a different number of clusters.
And so, single link clustering or hierarchical clustering, in general,
can give us either one cluster or the number of our samples,
number of over data points in clusters, and everything between.
So, as we've mentioned,
the distance measure between clusters is
the thing that separates a lot of the hierarchical clustering methods.
Single link looks at the closest points between two clusters,
and then it compares those,
and so, between these distances between clusters,
this is the smallest, and so,
these would be the two clusters that we will group in this step.
This, however, leads single link to sometimes produce elongated clusters.
Well, in a lot of cases we would like,
you know, more compact clusters.
It also results in single link clustering sometimes having a cluster
that eats up most of the data set.
So, that's why we'll look at other hierarchical clustering methods.
But before we do that,
let's do a quick comparison with K-means.